=pod

=head1 NAME

nsmount - Mount filesystems in a specific namespace

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over 12

=item B<nsmount> B<-x> I<xid> I<src> I<dst> [I<opts>]

=item B<nsmount> B<-x> I<xid> B<-u> I<mnt> [I<opts>]

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<nsmount> is a very simple utility to perform mount/umount operations inside a
different namespace, referenced through the associated xid. It works along
basically the same lines as util-vserver's vnamespace utility, excepted for
the fact that it performs mount operations itself rather than invoquing 
another utility.

B<nsmount> supports two forms of invocation:

=over 12

=item B<nsmount> B<-x> I<xid> I<src> I<dst> [I<opts>]

=back

Mount operation: B<xid> is the xid of the vserver context referencing the target 
namespace. B<src> is the source/spec for the mount call. When this means the 
path to a device/directory (rather than C<none>, C<proc>, etc.), that path is 
relative to the target namespace's root. B<dst> is the intended target for the 
mount call, with path relative to the root of the target namespace.


=over 12

=item B<nsmount> B<-x> I<xid> B<-u> I<mnt> [I<opts>]

=back

Umount operation: B<xid> is as above.  B<mnt> is an active mount point in the 
target namespace, with path relative to the root of the target namespace.

The bonus of using B<nsmount> in that case is that /bin/(u)mount is not needed 
inside the target namespace (which is most important when that namespace is 
actually 'chrooted', as occurs with vsctl), nor is it needed to call an 
untrusted 'context-side' binary from the ADMIN context.

=head1 OPTIONS

Appart from -x (xid for the target namespace) and -u (umount), B<nsmount> supports
some of the 'canonical' /bin/mount options:

=over 12

=item B<-o> I<opt1>,I<opt2> 	

Mount options, e.g. -o remount,rw. The keywords are the 
same as those used for util-linux's mount, although not all are supported.

=item B<-t> I<type>	

Specify a filesystem type (arbitrarily).

=back

A specific option is also supported:

=over 12

=item B<-m> F<path>

Use F<path> as a mtab file to update (adding lines for mounts, removing them
for umounts). By default, no mtab file is used. F<path> is used in the 
caller's namespace, rather than the target namespace. It can be either a 
relative path from the caller's working directory, or an absolute path.

=head1 AUTHOR 

Vincent Strubel <L<clipos@ssi.gouv.fr>>

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<vsctl(8)|vsctl>, L<vspace(8)|vspace>, L<mount(8)|mount>, L<vserver(8)|vserver>
 
=cut
